Agenda: [https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/blob/master/meetings/agenda-2018-02-16.md](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/blob/master/meetings/agenda-2018-02-16.md)

Attendees: Zibi Braniecki, Mozilla (ZB), Caridy Patiño (CP), Brian Terlson (BT), Doug Ilijev (DIV), Jack Horton (JH) Steven R. Loomis (SR), Shane Carr (SC), Jeff Genovy (JG) Felipe (F)

Agenda:

1. TC39 summary
    1. ECMA 402 2018 edition feature set finalized
        * [formatToParts](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/47)
        * [PluralRules](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-plural-rules)
        * [hourCycle](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/135)
    2. Features reached Stage 3
        * [ListFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-list-format)
        * [RelativeTimeFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-relative-time)
        * [Locale](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-locale)
    3. [lb option added to Segmenter](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter/pull/24);[ renamed to lineBreakStyle](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter/pull/25)
    4. [Settled on numeric: always/auto](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-relative-time/pull/60)
    5. [Explained the existence of this call; well-received](https://github.com/tc39/tc39-notes/blob/master/es8/2018-01/jan-23.md#4-ecma402-status-updates)
    6. Non-members who contribute to ECMA 402 (either PRs or in this call): Sign[ this form](https://tc39.github.io/agreements/contributor/) to license contributions to Ecma
2. Questions/issues with existing advanced proposals and APIs
    1. [Normative: Add calendar and numberingSystem options](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/pull/175)
        * Should we do validation which throws for these? Is there an ICU API?
    2. [Segmenter: Should we add all the options (lw, ss), or just lb?](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-segmenter/issues/23)
        * At the last meeting, it seemed like Steven favorited this change but Jungshik was hesitant
        * tiebreaker: stay minimal?
    3. Locale:
        * [Consider performing complete Unicode extension canonicalization per RFC6067](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-locale/issues/14)
            * Namely, should we sort and deduplicate all of the extensions (not just the recognized ones)?
        * [Return DefaultLocale() when calling Intl.Locale() with an absent/undefined tag argument?](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-locale/issues/15)
        * [Spec questions/errors](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-locale/issues/12)
            * Do we want to carry forward the optionality of kf and kn?
            * How are we handling regular and irregular grandfathered tags? (also for the[ main specification](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/177)) anba's questions
3. ICU tickets to support existing advanced proposals and APIs
    1. [Add RelativeDateTimeFormatter.format(FieldPositionIterator)?](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/13256)
        * Dan sent an icu-design email; does anyone want to review?
        * ICU patch wanted
    2. [RelativeDateTimeFormatter doesn't handle -0 well](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/12936)
        * ICU patch wanted
    3. [TimeZone::getOffset() : add two params to control repeated/skipped wall time](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/13268)
        * Jungshik wrote a patch, anyone want to review?
        * Was a proposal sent to icu-design? (Dan can't find it)
    4. [Get locales with PluralRules support](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/12756)
        * Should we close as will-not-fix because all locales will always be x1considered supported?
    5. Any other support needed from ICU for Intl proposals?
4. New proposals
    1. [NumberFormat changes](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/215), including (a) restructuring the spec, (b) minor changes to behavior, (c) support for measure units, and (d) support for scientific and compact notation.
        * Overall thoughts?
        * What to do with the style option: "deprecate" it (Option 1) or keep it as a first-class citizen (Option 2)?
        * Where to put the modifiers for units, like the width and compound units: as a top-level setting (Option A) or as a nested object literal on the unit key (Option B)?
    2. [UnitFormat](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-unit-format) ([bug](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/32)) (Stage 1)
        * Still relevant with Shane's proposal?
        * API suggestions for[ compound units](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-intl-unit-format/issues/2)?
    3. [Closure i18n features](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1WSvi865QADMs6vi6Z91hNauxxx_4cjyzdYPCNyJ_Xgc/edit#gid=0)
        * Number parsing (Discuss)
        * Compact decimal format (covered by Shane's proposal)
        * Scientific format (covered by Shane's proposal)
        * [IntervalFormat](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/issues/188)
            * Should we add .formatRange(date1, date2) to Intl.DateTimeFormat or propose adding a new formatter (Intl.DateIntervalFormat)?
        * Date time parsing (Discuss)
        * Unicode BIDI algorithm (Discuss; not in Closure)
5. Future meetings
    1. Does the two-hour, once a month format still work well?
    2. Feedback about prioritization, running meeting, etc
    3. Is March 16th at 17:15 UTC a good next meeting time? (Note: TC39 is in London March 20-22)
        * Are we missing out on participation from Asia with these meeting times?
        * Standing request: Find a time which is not Friday evening in some time zones

Notes:

**Item 1.i:**

ZB: One open issue for me. This table [https://kangax.github.io/compat-table/esintl/](https://kangax.github.io/compat-table/esintl/) is very outdated.

BT: It takes a couple of hours to update the chakra status report.

**Item 1.ii**

ZB: Any comments about those 3 proposals? None

Item 1.iii:

**Item 1.iv:**

ZB: We have merged the update to the numeric option based. Spidermonkey folks don’t like this name, but there is not a counterproposal. I’m fine with this name.

**Item 1.v:**

ZB: We have presented in the tc39 meeting!

**Item 1.vi:**

...

**Item 2.i:**

ZB: Any thoughts on this? Questions is whether or not we should throw with values out of range?

SR: It is very problematic to say what supported actually mean.

ZB: What happen if we try to pass the wrong argument? Any thoughts?

SR: That’s the other design decision.

SC: I’m trying to understand this proposal?

ZB: Calendar and number system are supported as locale extension keys right now. But they are not supported via option bag. I’m ok with not throwing when invalid options are provided.

ZB: we have consensus to match existing behavior of extension keys and options. I will document the consensus.

**Item 2.ii:**

JH: It is definitely a concern if engines start having different data.

SR: Not all scripts are supported in one environment. I know chrome modifies the data heavily.

SR: Maybe we can use an extension pack. It depends on the application.

SR: How does the browser breaks today?

NC: I think we do character break only.

SR: I’m just trying to make a point about the data size.

ZB: ??

SR: This is a newer feature.

ZB: Let’s take this offline. ???

ZB: We are leaning toward SR suggestion.

**Item 2.iii:**

ZB: ...explaining the proposal...

ZB: Any concerns about this?

NC: No.

**Item 2.iii.b:**

ZB: I don’t have strong opinions about this. Different systems allow differnet locale for different intl feature. Using the same locale for all, number, date, plurals, is not always true.

ZB: I think it should throw or an empty option bag.

NC: Is und-c-ca-gregorian useful for anyone? Where do you use that?

SR: Is just default behavior.

NC: No, I’m is this even useful in any case?

SR: It is not great to show it to the glass, but it is going to be consistent when carry on certain operations.

SR: und is root.

JS: better for users to explicitly specify a locale, rather than mysterious default locale showing up automatically

??: 

Conclusion: Throw when a locale isn’t provided.

**Item 2.iii.c**

ZB: 

SR: 

**Item 3 (ICU tickets)**

3.i

SR: we just closed feature freeze for 61.

3.ii:

ZB: This should be a quick fix. Maybe someone from this group wants to take this one.

SR: Shane, is this something that will be changed by your new code?

SR: Lets take it offline, it is just a bug.

3.iii:

JS: There is a more simpler solution here. I will follow up on that. We missed the train for the next ICU release.

SR: Any implementation should not be blocked by ICU.

JS: Even with the current ICU, it is possible to do the right thing.

3.iv:

ZB: any locale that we support have plural rules. Basically, the list of supported languages in plural rules is the same everywhere.

ZB: ICU [does not have a separate ](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/12756)[list](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/12756)[ for locales that support plural rules](https://ssl.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/12756). The assumption is that you can have different data for date, number, etc., but it is not well defined for plural rules.

DI: This sounds like a bug in ICU, and should not affect the spec in any way.

DI: Basically, we have a gentleman's agreement on this!

JH: one other question: I missed section ????

4. (New Proposals)

4.i:

SC: … quick overview… 2min.

ZB: My understanding is that this is a counterproposal for the unit format proposal

SC: yes, this includes unit format on it.

JH: I want to point two things. This relies heavily on ICU design, which MS usually push back. Point two is the the C implementation of these ICU apis is very far away it seems. This might put a serious burden on us.

SC: Yes, there are ICU Apis that maps directly to this new APIs. But this is a 402 spec, we don’t have to model the spec after ICU. 

DIV: We (Chakra) must have non-experimental ICU C (not C++) APIs to implement any of these features. Until experimental tag is removed from those C APIs, we should not allow these proposals to get to stage 4.

ZB: spidermonkey also prefers the C, instead of the C++.

SR: I think this should be a different discussion.

ZB: Concerns about new ICU apis are accurate, but we have a long road ahead.

NC: Another problem: Making one of the options obsolete, vs keeping it around.

CP: We did something very similar in 262 for the class orthogonality analysis and proposal. This proposal, even if it is not adopted, we can use it as a framework for smaller related proposals to have consistency across options, and axis.

Conclusion: few more days of discussions, then a new repo for the stage 0 proposal. We will discuss it in details in next meeting ahead of the tc39 meeting for stage 1.

4.iii:

F: … quick overview … 2min

F: The biggest question I have is whether we should add a new method formatRange to the datetimeformat, or a different constructor.

F: Another questions here is about format to parts for ranges. This will require new ICU APIs.

ZB: general agreement is that any formatting method should have the format to parts counterpart as well.

F: Does this means I should add that one here?

ZB: Yes.

Conclusion: Felipe will prepare the material to present it on the next tc39 meeting.

5.i

NC: the last one worked better.

• looking at overflow: [https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/blob/master/meetings/agenda-2018-02-16.md#overflow](https://github.com/tc39/ecma402/blob/master/meetings/agenda-2018-02-16.md#overflow)

ZB: ovf 1.iv.b - likelySubtags

NC: maximize?  Yes.  (and minimize)

ZB: ovf 1.vi.a: datetime style? 

CP: Organizational…  Will be out 2H2018, need help on editorial role.

SR: FYI,  node Intl WG decommissioned,  new node **[i18**n](https://github.com/nodejs/i18n/) WG with similar charter (and more participation, including l10n) [couldn't talk for some reason]

